Talking Head 1
--------------

Hello, my name is Tom Williams and I was one of the judges for the Colour
Maximite 1 & 2 BASIC Programming Challenge in 2021.

In this video I showcase, in no particular order, all the entries to the
Challenge before counting down the three winners. Please note that any opinions
that I express are my own and are not necessarily representative of the views of
the other judges.

The rules for the Challenge and links to the source for all the entries is
provided in the description below.

In summary the rules required each entry to be a single BASIC file that would
fit in one editor page of 48 lines each of 100 characters. As you will see this
led to some impressive entries, but with a couple of exceptions not to readable
code.


Chemi Chaos (Redux) @lizby
--------------------------

First up we have "Chemi Chaos (Redux)" an entry by LIZBY based on a program
orginally written by VEGIPETE. This is an interesting logic game where the
object is to move the chemical balls between the test tubes such that all the
balls of the same colour end up in the same test tube. At no time is the player
allowed to place one ball on-top of a ball of a different colour.

This game was a fun challenge though I initially struggled with the controls, I
think using the cursor-keys might have been more intuitive. A more significant
issue is that it doesn't automatically recognise when you have completed a
level, you have to manually press [X].

As source-code goes this is actually one of the clearer programs despite the
lack of whitespace or comments. I note that there is still plenty of space left
left that might have been used to squeeze in some sound effects and music whilst
still keeping to the Challenge's restrictions.


Iceberg @ realbobele
--------------------

For our second entry we have "Iceberg" by REAL-BOB-ELE, my apologies if I've pronounced his
handle incorrectly.

What first excited me about this entry is that the author
provided this mock cassette cover that was evocative of the games I would see
and buy in the late 1980's.

The game itself is a basic affair, the object being to pilot the boat along an
ever narrowing scrolling river without hitting the ice cliffs on either side.
Simple but effective and reminiscent of games you might expect on the very early
8-bit machines or in type-in magazines.

Much like the previous entry the source-code is generally readable though
lacking in indentation and comments. As later entries will show there is plenty
of space left for embelishment.


Ten Line Sokoban (with Sprites) @Volhout
----------------------------------------

Our third entry is "Ten Line Sokoban (with Sprites)" by VOLHOUT. So called
because the game engine (and original posted code) only takes up an impressive
ten lines of code and the remainder of the permitted space is taken up by
the game and sprite data. Equally impressive is that this entry was written for
the ORIGINAL Colour Maximite though with help from the community on
"The Back Shed" VOLHOUT also provided the judge's with a Colour Maximite 2
version.

The program is a logic puzzle game in which the player pushes crates around a
warehouse trying to get them in the correct storage location. Apparently this
is a popular genre of game that had until now completely escaped me, my
success rate was not impressive. The game was fun if frustrating, it would be
much improved by some manner of success animation and some sound effects or
music.

The source-code takes up a single page of 38 lines of 80 characters as allowed
by the original Colour Maximite editor and it is very dense. As mentioned before
the game engine only takes up 10 lines with the remainder being the data for the
levels, the code to extract the sprites and finally the sprite data itself.


Tower of Hanoi @Jiri
--------------------

Next up is a puzzle game by JIRI, this time based on the classic Tower of Hanoi
puzzle where the object is to move all the discs from tower 1 to tower 3 without
ever placing a larger disc on top of a smaller.

This was an exceptionally complete entry that somehow fitted in both an
"attract screen" and in-game music. The fact that it did not place amongst the
three winners is just an indication of how high the standard of entries was.

The only thing I can say constructively about the source-code is that is is
dense. However JIRI did also provide an indented and commented expanded
version which is available via the links in the description.


Resistors @Mixtel
-----------------

Our fifth entry was also the only non-game and is by MIXTEL90. For the
uninitiated this program explains and explores the mysteries of the coloured
bands on resistors.

Only being a very novice electronics hobbyist myself there is not much I can say
about this program though it is both informative and competent. I think it would have
been nice if there was an option to colour the resistor body in the common beige
or blue and perhaps there could have been a quiz mode where the player is
expected to identify resistor values against the clock ... though in reality
I myself struggle to distinguish between the colours on the blue metal-oxide resistors.

Wonder of wonders the source-code has both a little indenting and some comments
and scored points in the Challenge for both.


In Defence of the Green Hills of Earth @Vegipete
------------------------------------------------

Next in our showcase is the work of VEGIPETE who is a force of nature when it
comes to writing programs for the Colour Maximite 2. The Challenge was no
exception and not only did he contribute ideas, optimisations and bugfixes for
some of the other entries he even found time to write a trilogy of games
himself. The rules only allowed each entrant a single program and after some
sustained prodding he eventually submitted the final part of his trilogy to the
judges. However before we get to that I want to showcase the first two parts
both of which were exceptional achievements in their own right.

Part I of the trilogy is "In Defence of the Green Hills of Earth" a very
competent Space Invaders clone that even includes the bonus flying saucer.
About the only thing missing for the full nostalgic experience are the
original's unmistakable sound effects. I also don't recall the original last
few aliens generating such an overwhelming rain of death rays but that may
just be me being a sore loser.

The source-code is dense though I liked the smattering of amusing comments.
Fortunately VEGIPETE did also provide indented and commented expanded
versions of all three parts of the trilogy which are available via the links in
the description.


In Renewed Defence of the Green Hills @Vegipete
-----------------------------------------------

The second part of VEGIPETE's trilogy is "In Renewed Defence of the Green Hills"
which continues the retro-game theme by being a Missile Command clone.

I've always been a big fan of Missile Command and this version was no exception,
especially once I worked out I needed to use all 3-buttons of the mouse in order
to control the three silos.

As before density is the source-code's chief achievement.


Escape to the Green Hills @Vegipete
-----------------------------------

The third part of VEGIPETE's trilogy "Escape to the Green Hills" also
coincidentally placed a well-deserved THIRD in the Challenge.

The object of this game is to navigate the alien invaders multi-level mazelike
command centre to find and activate its self-destruct whilst collecting a
smattering of objects and avoiding the alien guards.

I found this game reminiscent of both 3D Monster Maze on the ZX-81 and
Transylvanian Tower on the ZX-Spectrum. Navigating some of the later levels of
the maze can certainly be as frustrating as the latter was.

Once more the extremely dense source code helps explain how VEGIPETE was able
to do so much with so little.


Gravity Assist @TimD
--------------------

The judges gave SECOND place to GRAVITY ASSIST a novel puzzle game by TimD.

In this game the object is to select the correct angle for a space-ship to
fire its thrusters in order for it to navigate the gravity wells of the various
planets and safetly reach the space station.

The game is well polished, and both interesting and frustrating in equal measure
I've personally never seen anything like it, and if it is an original concept
then I suggest Tim creates a mobile-phone version forthwith and attempts to
cash-in.

Despite the dense code the smattering of whitespace and helpful comments helped
this program to its well deserved SECOND place.


Hope Robot @MauroXavier
-----------------------

And finally to our winner, HOPE ROBOT by MAURO XAVIER. Mauro is one of the
most accomplished developers on the Colour Maximite 2 having produced clones of
both Wolfenstein 3D and Gauntlet as well as an impressive DEMO SCENE style
program.

His entry for the challenge was an arcade game, the premise of which -
appropriate given that this has been the year of Covid-19 - is that you are a
nanobot navigating the bloodstream of patients eradicating a virus plague. What
this boils down to is a highly-polished shoot-em up with simple but effective
graphics, sound and game-play.

I think the source-code is the densest of all the entries with maybe 30 unused
characters - very impressive - even if it makes the eyes bleed.

I honestly made every effort to find fault with Mauro's entry but I'm not sure
what more could be achieved in the available space and he is a worthy winner.
If we repeat this Challenge in future years then I suspect we will need to
invite him to act as a judge so as to increase everybody else's chances.


Talking Head 2
--------------

And that is it for this year's Challenge.

I'd like to thank our worthy winners, all the brave contestants who exposed
their code to the world and my fellow judges including Mick Gulovsen who
provided the prizes, Bill McKinley who stepped in at the last minute to help
and NEE-MOWEE Jenkins whose idea this was originally. Finally a big thank you
to Geoff Graham, Peter Mather and the others involved in the creation of
this wonderful toy called the Colour Maximite 2.

Hopefully we will do this all again in 12 months time. In the meantime thanks
for watching and if you have any comments, good or bad, then please leave them
in the comments below.
